=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-xlogin - log into an X session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B</usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin> [I<OPTIONS>] ADDRESSES ...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-xlogin> is an L<xdm(1)> xlogin and chooser replacement that
provides a much nicer appearing login screen for L<xdm(1)>.  It is
designed to let L<xdm(1)> do the heavy lifting of coordinating the
majority of the XDMCP protocol while providing a more aesthetic
appearance.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item I<ADDRESSES>

Provides the human-readable (decimal and dot notation, host name)
specification of the display managers to query to determine whether they
are willing to manage a display.  In addition to all manner of textual
IP addresses, the special value C<BROADCAST> can be specified to indicate
to the chooser that it should (also) broadcast queries to discover
display managers.  The special value C<DNS-SD> can be specified to
indicate to the chooser that it should (also) use C<DNS-SD> to discover
display managers that offer the C<tcp.xdmcp> service.  The special
value C<MULTICAST> can be specified to indicate to the chooser that it
should (also) use multicast to discover display managers.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

No options are necessary.  When launched by L<xdm(1)>, it will provide
the appropriate arguments.  B<xde-xlogin> can be launched directly on
the command line of an x-terminal to test its appearance and operation.
In this mode, arguments are still required by no options.  Absence of
the B<-xdmaddress>, B<-clientaddress> and B<-connectionType> options
indicates to B<xde-xlogin> that it was not launched by B<xdm(1)> or an
B<xdm(1)> work-alike as a chooser.  See L</USAGE> for more information.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

When no command option is specified, B<xde-xlogin> executes the program.
The following command options, when specified, print information instead
of running the program.

=over 4

=item B<-help>

=item B<-version>

=item B<-copying>

=back

=head2 XDM OPTIONS

XDM options are not normally specified by the user of the program on the
command line: they are, instead, provided by XDM when B<xde-xlogin> is
being used as a greeter program.

=over 4

=item B<-xdmaddress> I<ADDRESS>

Specifies the address of a TCP socket upon which L<xdm(1)> is awaiting
instructions for the server.  L<xdm(1)> encodes this as I<ADDRESS> as a
string of hexadecimal characters (with no 0x prefix) representing the
binary socket address.  The first two bytes are a host-byte-order 16-bit
address family (e.g. AF_INET); the second and third bytes are the
host-byte-order 16-bit port number; and the remaining 4 or 16 bytes are
the IPv4 or IPv6 network-byte-order IP address.

B<xde-xlogin> uses this option to communicate the selection back to L<xdm(1)>.

=item B<-clientaddress> I<IPADDR>

Specifies the client IP address I<IPADDR> that initiated the request.
L<xdm(1)> encodes this as a string of hexadecimal characters (with no 0x
prefix) representing the 4- or 16-byte IPv4 or IPv6 network-byte-order
IP address.

B<xde-xlogin> uses this option to identify the originating client back
to L<xdm(1)> when a selection is made.

=item B<-connectionType> I<TYPE>

Specifies the connection type supported by the client as a decimal
number, I<TYPE>.

B<xde-xlogin> uses this option to filter the list of willing display
managers to those that support this connection type.  The three types of
interest to L<xdm(1)> (see F</usr/include/X11/Xdmcp.h>) are:

=over 4

=item 0 - B<FamilyInternet> (AF_INET addresses only)

=item 6 - B<FamilyInternet6> (AF_INET6 addresses only)

=item 256 - B<FamilyLocal> (AF_UNIX addresses only)

=back

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-welcome> I<TEXT>

Specifies the pango markup text that is to be displayed in the title
area of the host menu.  As with the B<-banner> option, this option can
easily be supplied by a shell script between L<xdm(1)> and
B<xde-xlogin> that adds the options:

 #!/bin/sh
 /usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin -welcome "Welcome to X!" \
	 -banner /usr/lib/X11/xdm/banner.png $@

=item B<-banner> I<PNGFILE>

Specifies the banner graphic to display in the left pane of the host
menu.  L<xdm(1)> does not provide this option, but it can easily be
invoked by a shell script invoked by L<xdm(1)> that adds the options.
For example:

 #!/bin/sh
 /usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin -banner /usr/lib/X11/xdm/banner.png $@

=item B<-splash> I<JPGFILE>

=item B<-side> {B<top>|B<left>|B<bottom>|B<right>}

=item B<-charset> I<CHARSET>

=item B<-language> I<LANGUAGE>

=item B<-icons> I<THEME>

=item B<-theme> I<THEME>

=item B<-xde-theme>

=item B<-vendor> I<VENDOR>

=item B<-dry-run>

=item B<-debug> I<LEVEL>

=item B<-verbose> I<LEVEL>

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

B<xde-xlogin> has no configuration of its own.  If you want to change
its look or behaviour, you are welcome to hack the code.  It is only
about 600 lines of C<C>.  There is a F<banner.png> file used that is
installed by default in F</usr/lib/X11/xdm/banner.png>.

=over 4

=item B<DisplayManager>.I<DISPLAY>.B<chooser>

This option, described in L<xdm(1)>, is used to tell L<xdm(1)> which
program to run as a chooser.  This should be set to
F</usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin>.  See L<xdm(1)/CHOOSER>.

=item B<DisplayManager>.I<DISPLAY>.B<greeter>

This option, described in L<xdm(1)>, is used to tell L<xdm(1)> which
program to run as a greeter.  This should be set to
F</usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin>.  See L<xdm(1)/AUTHENTICATION WIDGET>.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F</usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde-xlogin>

The default location of the B<xde-xlogin> executable.

=item F</usr/lib/X11/xmd/banner.png>

The default location of the banner graphic.

=back

=head1 USAGE

=head1 BUGS

B<xde-xlogin> had no known bugs at the time of release.  Please report
bugs for current versions to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xde-session/issues>.

=head1 HISTORY

I used to use a patched version of L<slim(1)> for this purpose; however,
L<slim(1)> has deficiencies with regard to establishing XDE sessions and
has no provision for being used as a B<chooser>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xdm(1)>,
L<xde-xchooser(1)>,
L<slim(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@cpan.org>

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
