=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-login - Log into an X Session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-login> [I<OPTIONS>] [[-e|--exec|--] I<COMMAND> [I<ARGUMENT> [...]]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-login> is a simple C<C> language program the establishes a user
X session.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over

=item [B<-e>, B<--exec>, B<-->] I<COMMAND> [I<ARGUMENT> [...]]

When specified, this sequence must be the last portion of the command
line.  I<COMMAND> is the command to execute and I<ARGUMENT>s are the
arguments for I<COMMAND>.  B<xde-login> will L<execvpe(3)> the command
and arguments with the PAM environment.

When unspecified, defaults to

 /bin/sh -ls -C $HOME/.xinitrc

when F<$HOME/.xinitrc> exists and is executable.  Otherwise, defaults to

 /bin/sh -l /etc/X11/xinit/xinitrc

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-login>.
B<xdg-login> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to login the user given the other options and execute the
I<COMMAND> and I<ARGUMENT>s within the user session.

=over

=item B<-h>, B<--help>, B<-?>, B<--?>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 LOGIN OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-d>, B<--display> I<DISPLAY>

The display to use, I<DISPLAY>.
Defaults to the contents of the B<DISPLAY> environment variable.
When set, the B<DISPLAY> environment variable will be set in the user
session.  The PAM environment variables B<XDISPLAY> and B<DISPLAY> will
also be set to the display for the user session.  When B<--tty> is not
set, the PAM environment variable B<TTY> will also be set to this value
for the user session.

=item B<-A>, B<--authfile> I<AUTHFILE>

The X authority file, I<AUTHFILE>.  The default when unspecified is the
X Authority filename returned by L<XauFileName(3)>, which first checks
the B<XAUTHORITY> environment variable and otherwise defaults to
F<$HOME/.Xauthority>.
When set, the B<XAUTHORITY> environment variable will be set to the file
name in the user session.  The PAM environment variable B<XAUTHORITY>
will also be set to the file name in the user session.

=item B<-E>, B<--desktop> I<DESKTOP>

The target XDG desktop environment.  When unspecified, defaults to the
contents of the B<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP> environment variable.
When set, the B<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP> environment variable will be set to
the desktop name in the user session.

=item B<-S>, B<--service> I<SERVICE>

The PAM service to use for login, I<SERVICE>.  When unspecified,
defaults to C<login>.

=item B<-T>, B<--vt> I<VTNUMBER>

The virtual terminal number, I<VTNUMBER>.
Defaults to C<auto>.
When set to C<auto>, the B<XFree86_VT> property on the X server root
window is used.
When set, the B<XDG_VTNR> environment variable will be set to the VT
number in the user session.

=item B<-s>, B<--seat> I<SEAT>

The seat number, I<SEAT>.
Defaults to C<auto>.
When set to C<auto>, the B<Xorg_Seat> property on the X server root
window is used.  When no B<Xorg_Seat> property exists on the X server,
and the B<--vt> option is specified or defaults to a value, C<seat0> is
used.
When set, the B<XDG_SEAT> environment variable will be set to the seat
name in the user session.  The PAM environment variable B<WINDOWPATH>
will also be set to the seat name in the user session.

=item B<-y>, B<--tty> I<TTY>

The tty device, I<TTY>.
Defaults to C<auto>.
When set to C<auto> and a B<--vt> option or default is available,
defaults to C<tty%d>, where C<%d> is the VT number.
When set, the PAM environment variable B<TTY> will be set to the tty
name in the user session.

=item B<-c>, B<--class> I<CLASS>

The B<XDG_SESSION_CLASS>, I<CLASS>.
Defaults to C<user>.
When set, the B<XDG_SESSION_CLASS> environment variable will be set to
the session class name in the user session.

=item B<-t>, B<--type> I<TYPE>

The B<XDG_SESSION_TYPE>, I<TYPE>.
Defaults to C<x11>.
When set, the B<XDG_SESSION_TYPE> environment variable will be set to
the session type name in the user session.

=item B<-u>, B<--user> I<USER>

User of session to create, I<USER>.
Defaults to the user name associated with the calling process.
When set, the B<RUSER> environment variable will be set to the user name
in the user session.  The PAM environment variables B<USER> and
B<LOGNAME> will also be set to the user name in the user session.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-n>, B<--dry-run>

Do not execute anything, just print what would be done to standard output.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Increment or set output verbosity level, I<LEVEL>.  This option can be
repeated.  Defaults to C<1>.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Increment or set debug level, I<LEVEL>.  This option can be repeated.
Defaults to C<0>.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<fbsession(1)>, L<lxsession(1)>, L<lxsession-logout(1)>,
L<lxde-logout(1)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=head1 LICENSE

See the F<COPYING> file in the distribution or use the B<--copying> flag
to display copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
