=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-input - X settings for the X Desktop Environment

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-input> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-input> is a X display, mouse and keyboard settings tool for the
I<X Desktop Environment>.  It can be used to set initial X Display
settings from a configuration file, or can launch a dialogue to
interactively set X Desktop input settings.  B<xde-input> runs as a
daemon and monitors for changes made by other configuration tools (such
as L<xset(1)> or L<lxinput(1)>) and log changes to its configuration
file.

The settings that can be set are those that can normally be performed
with L<xset(1)>, and are as follows:

=over

=item I<Keyboard>

Setting the keyboard I<LEDS> on or off.  The I<Keyclick> volume and
whether key clicks are on or off.  The I<Bell> volume, pitch and
duration.  Whether the I<Bell> is on or off.  Setting the I<Autorepeat>
delay and rate.  Turning I<Autorepeat> on or off.  Access to a wide
range of keyboard controls is available through the B<XKEYBOARD> X
Server extension.

=item I<Pointer>

Setting I<Mouse> acceleration (multiplier and divisor) and threshold.
Resetting the I<Mouse> to default acceleration and threshold.

=item I<Screen Saver>

Setting the I<Screen Saver> timeout and cycle.  Setting the I<Screen
Saver> to blank, expose, activate, default, not blank, not expose,
reset.  Setting the I<Screen Saver> on or off.

=item I<Colors>

Setting pixel values to a colour name.

=item I<Font Path>

Setting the I<Font Path>, or restoring the default font path.  Making
the server reread the font database.  Adding or removing elements to or
from the I<Font Path>.

=item I<DPMS (Energy Star)>

I<Standby> setting in seconds; I<Suspend> setting in seconds; I<Off>
setting in seconds.  Whether I<DPMS> is enabled or not.  Whether the
I<Monitor> is on or off.  Forcing the I<Monitor> to on, standby, suspend
or off.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xde-input> understands the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options alter the major operating mode of the program.  When no
command options are specified, the default is to run the program,
monitor input settings, and write out the values on exit or session
management shutdown.

=over

=item B<--replace>, B<-r>

When running an new instance of the program, replace existing instances.

=item B<--quit>, B<-q>

Ask any existing instances to quit.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Prints usage information and defaults to standard output and exits.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Prints detailed version information to standard output and exits.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Prints detailed copying permissions to standard output and exits.

=item B<--editor>, B<-e>

When running the program, launch the editor.  This can be combined with
other command options.  If an existing instance is running, this option
will request that the running instance launch the editor, unless
B<--replace> is also specified.

=item B<--trayicon>, B<-t>

When running the program, show the status icon in the system tray.  This
can be combined with other command options.  If an existing instance is
running, this instance will request that the running instance launch the
tray icon, unless B<--replace> is also specified.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

General options modify the operation of the program.  The following
general options are recognized:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specifies the display to use.  For the most part, just use the
B<$DISPLAY> environment variable.

=item B<--screen>, B<-s> I<SCREEN>

Specifies the screen on which to launch the editor.

=item B<--button>, B<-b> I<BUTTON>

Specifies which button, I<BUTTON>, was used to launch the program.
Specifying a I<BUTTON> of zero (0), specifies that the program was
launched from the keyboard.  When this option is not present,
B<xde-input> applies heuristics to determine on which monitor the editor
should be launched.

This option is useful for selecting the active monitor when launching
the editor.

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v> [I<LEVEL>]

Prints additional information to standard output while operating.

=item B<--debug>, B<-D> [I<LEVEL>]

Prints debugging information to standard error while operating.

=item B<--editor>, B<-e>

When specified (or when the program is called as F<xde-input-edit>),
launch the X Server settings editor.  This is the default when called as
F<xde-input-edit>.

=item B<--filename>, B<-f> I<FILENAME>

Specify the file to use as the configuration file instead of the
default.  The default is F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/input.ini>.  This option
does not recognize C<-> as standard input: use F</dev/stdin> instead.

=back

=head2 SESSION MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

Session management options are used by the program to communicate with
itself and should not normally be specified by users.  The following
session management options are recognized:

=over

=item B<-clientId> I<SESSIONID>

Specifies the session ID, I<SESSIONID>, used by B<xde-input> in the
previous session.  Normally only invoked in this fashion when restarted
by a session manager.

=item B<-restore> I<SAVEFILE>

Specifies the file, I<SAVEFILE>, used by B<xde-input> to save state in
the previous session.  Normally only invoked in this fashion when
restarted by a session manager.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

As an XDG compatible application, B<xde-input> considers the following
environment variables when calculating the location of the user's
configuration file and the default configuration files:

=over

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

When unspecified, defaults to F<$HOME/.config> in accordance with XDG
specifications.  B<xde-input> looks for user configuration files in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/input.ini>.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

When unspecified, defaults to F</etc/xdg> in accordance with XDG
specifications.  XDE will prepend the F</etc/xdg/xde> directory to this
path if it does not already exist in the path.  B<xde-input> looks for
system configuration files in F<$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/xde/input.ini>.

=back

=head1 SIGNALS

B<xde-input> intercepts and acts upon the following signals:

=over

=item I<SIGHUP>

When B<xde-input> receives a I<SIGHUP> signal, it rereads the
configuration from the X Server and writes the configuration file.

=item I<SIGINT>

When B<xde-input> receives a I<SIGHUP> signal (interrupt from the
keyboard), it exits without writing the configuration file.

=item I<SIGTERM>

When B<xde-input> receives a I<SIGTERM> signal, it rereads the
configuration from the X Server, and writes the current settings into
the configuration file if possible before exiting gracefully.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION FILE

When B<xde-input> starts it reads the configuration file located in
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/xde/input.ini> unless the configuration file was
overridden with options on the command line.  If the configuration file
does not exist, it copies the first file it finds in
F<@XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/xde/input.ini>.  When no configuration file is found
at all, it does not change settings and will write the current
configuration to the configuration file.

B<xde-input> monitors the configuration file for changes and applies
changes when detected.  Note that the file parser is not very robust,
so when editing by hand, avoid syntax errors.

The configuration file is F<.ini> format and has several sections
containing the following information as follows:

=over

=item DPMS

 [DPMS]
 OffTimeout=600
 PowerLevel=DPMSModeOn
 StandbyTimeout=300
 State=false
 SuspendTimeout=450

=item Keyboard

 [Keyboard]
 AutoRepeats=00FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF
 BellDuration=100
 BellPercent=78
 BellPitch=480
 GlobalAutoRepeat=true
 KeyClickPercent=10
 LEDMask=0

=item Pointer

 [Pointer]
 AccelerationDenominator=1
 AccelerationNumerator=2
 Threshold=4

=item ScreenSaver

 [ScreenSaver]
 AllowExposures=DontAllowExposures
 Interval=300
 PreferBlanking=DontPreferBlanking
 Timeout=240

=item XKeyboard

 [XKeyboard]
 AccessXFeedbackMaskEnabled=true
 AccessXKeysEnabled=false
 AccessXOptions=SlowKeysPress;SlowKeysAccept;Feature;SlowWarn;StickyKeys;BounceKeysReject;DumbBell
 AccessXTimeout=120
 AccessXTimeoutMask=SlowKeysAccept;Feature;SlowWarn;Indicator
 AccessXTimeoutMaskEnabled=true
 AccessXTimeoutOptionsMask=Indicator
 AccessXTimeoutOptionsValues=
 AccessXTimeoutValues=
 AudibleBellMaskEnabled=true
 BounceKeysEnabled=false
 ControlsEnabledEnabled=false
 DebounceDelay=300
 GroupsWrapEnabled=false
 IgnoreGroupLockMaskEnabled=true
 IgnoreLockModsEnabled=false
 InternalModsEnabled=false
 MouseKeysAccelEnabled=true
 MouseKeysCurve=500
 MouseKeysDelay=160
 MouseKeysDfltBtn=1
 MouseKeysEnabled=false
 MouseKeysInterval=40
 MouseKeysMaxSpeed=30
 MouseKeysTimeToMax=30
 Overlay1MaskEnabled=false
 Overlay2MaskEnabled=false
 PerKeyRepeat=00FFFFFFDFFFFBBFFADFFFEFFFEDFFFF9FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF7FFFFFFFFFFFF
 PerKeyRepeatEnabled=false
 RepeatDelay=285
 RepeatInterval=16
 RepeatKeysEnabled=true
 RepeatRate=62
 SlowKeysDelay=300
 SlowKeysEnabled=false
 StickyKeysEnabled=false
 Overlay2MaskENabled=false
 IgnoreGroupLockModsEnabled=true
 AccessXOptionsEnabled=true

=back

The package also installs by default an autostart F<.desktop> file to
autostart this program when any of the lightweight window managers
supported by XDE are loaded.

Supported lightweight window managers are: L<fluxbox(1)>,
L<blackbox(1)>, L<openbox(1)>, L<icewm(1)>, L<fvwm(1)>, and
L<wmaker(1)>.  Note, however, that although L<wmaker(1)> is capable of
managing L<xset(1)> parameters itself, it does not support all XKEYBOARD
extensions, so the default for B<XDE> is to configure window maker to
not set L<xset(1)> parameters.

=head1 EDITING INPUT SETTINGS

B<xde-input> provides a mechanism for editing settings by invoking it
using the B<--editor> option, or by invoking it as B<xde-input-edit>.
Other tools for editing input settings are L<lxinput(1)> and L<xset(1)>.
Values set with these tools are also detected and saved by B<xde-input>.
Note, however, that some versions of L<lxinput(1)> have bugs and
annoyingly incorrectly set key repeat rates (they set the rate to the
interval and intervals to the rate).

=head1 BUGS

B<xde-input> had no known bugs at the time of release.  Please report
bugs for current versions to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xde-session/issues>.

The status icon doesn't do much yet: don't use it.

=head1 HISTORY

I originally wrote this tool in L<perl(1)> because none of the
lightweight window managers (with the notable exception of WindowMaker)
save or restore the L<xset(1)> settings.  I got tired of typing C<xset r
rate 300 66> every time I entered an X Window session under
L<fluxbox(1)>, so I wrote this tool.  Unfortunately, I also had to write
the L<X11::Protocol::Ext::XKEYBOARD(3pm)> extension module to change
just that: the repeat delay and rate on the keyboard.  Then, after
discovering that L<lxinput(1)> incorrectly sets the rate to the interval
(or visa versa), I had to include an input editor.

The program was converted to C<C> for the I<X Desktop Environment>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xset(1)>,
L<lxinput(1)>.

=head1 LICENSE

See the F<COPYING> file in the distribution or use the B<--copying> flag
to display copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
