=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-xswitch - swtich between sessions of the X Desktop Environment (XDE)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-xswitch> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-xswitch> is a X session switching replacement that provides tight
integration with the L<systemd(8)> multi-session environment.  It acts as
a desktop switcher, detects L<logind(8)> C<Lock> signals, and
performs VT switching.

=head1 OPTIONS

No options are necessary.  When launched by L<xdm(8)>, it will provide
the appropriate arguments.  B<xde-xswitch> can be launched directly on
the command line of an x-terminal to test its appearance and operation.
In this mode, arguments are still required but no options.  Absence of
the B<-xdmAddress>, B<-clientAddress> and B<-connectionType> options
indicates to B<xde-xswitch> that it was not launched by L<xdm(8)> or an
L<xdm(8)> work-alike as a chooser.  See L</USAGE> for more information.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options affect the major operating mode of the program.  Only
one command option may be specified (with the exception that B<--help>
can be specified in conjunction with any other command option).
When no command option is specified, B<--switcher> is assumed.
The command options recognized by the program are as follows:

=over 4

=item [B<-S>, B<--switcher>]

Run continuously as a session switcher instance.  This process will monitor
for switching requests, VT changes and virtual
terminal changes will invoke switching as appropriate.

=item B<-r>, B<--replace>

Replace a currently running screen switcher instance with the current
process.

=item B<-s>, B<--switch>

Ask a running instance to switch the screen now.

=item B<-q>, B<--quit>

Ask a running instance to exit.

=item B<-H>, B<-help>

Instead of operating normally, the program prints usage information to
standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Instead of operating normally, the program prints detailed version
information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Instead of operating normally, the program prints detailed copying
permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

B<xde-xswitch> provides a set of general options that are not supported
by the L<xdm(8)> greeter or chooser.  To supply these options requires
an intermediate script that specifies them and echoes the L<xdm(8)>
chooser options.  So that an intermediate script is not necessary,
L<xdm(8)> provides an F<Xresources> files containing X resources that
are used instead of command line options to tailor the look and feel of
the greeter and chooser.  As a result, the use of the following command
line options are not necessary and are really only used for testing.

The following are the more general options:

=over 4

=item B<-p>, B<--prompt> I<MARKUP>

Specifies the F<pango> markup text that is to be displayed in the title
area of the panel.
When unspecified, the default welcome text is C<Welcome to %s!>, where C<%s>
is the fully qualified domain name of the local host.

As with the B<-banner> option, this option can easily be supplied by a
shell script between L<xdm(8)> and B<xde-xswitch> that adds the
options:

 #!/bin/sh
 /usr/bin/xde-xswitch -prompt "Welcome to X!"  \
         -banner /usr/lib/X11/xdm/banner.png $@

=item B<-b>, B<--banner> I<BANNER>

Specifies the banner graphic to display in the left pane of the panel.
L<xdm(8)> does not provide this option, but it can easily be
invoked by a shell script invoked by L<xdm(8)> that adds the options.
For example:

 #!/bin/sh
 /usr/bin/xde-xswitch -banner /usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde/banner.png $@

The default is obtained by looking for the file
F<${XDG_MENU_PREFIX}banner.{xpm,png,jpg,svg}> in the F<images>
subdirectory of standard XDG data directories, F<$XDG_DATA_DIRS>.  See
L</ENVIRONMENT>.

=item B<-S>, B<--splash> I<SPLASH>

Specifies the background image, I<SPLASH>, to display on the screen.
The default is to use the background image currently installed on the
screen, and if no background image is installed on the screen, to search
for the background image file in the file named
F<${XDG_MENU_PREFIX}splash.{xpm,png,jpg,svg}> in the F<images>
subdirectory of standard XDG data directories, F<$XDG_DATA_DIRS>.  See
L</ENVIRONMENT>.

L<xdm(8)> does not provide this option, but it can easily be
invoked by a shell script by L<xdm(8)> that adds the options.  For
example:

 #!/bin/sh
 /usr/bin/xde-xswitch -splash /usr/lib/X11/xdm/xde/splash.jpg $@

=item B<-s>, B<--side> {B<left>|B<top>|B<right>|B<bottom>}

Specifies the side on which to display branding (the banner graphic).
Can be one of I<top>, I<left>, I<bottom> or I<right>.  When unspecified,
the default is I<left>.

=item B<-n>, B<--noask>

=item B<--charset> I<CHARSET>

Specifies the character set to use.  When unspecified, the character
set is determined using the current locale: see L<locale(7)>.

=item B<--language> I<LANGUAGE>

Specifies the language to use.  When unspecified, the language is
determined using the current locale: see L<locale(7)>.

=item B<-i>, B<--icons> I<ICON-THEME>

Specifies the GTK+ icon theme to use.  When unspecified, the icon theme
is automatically determined using desktop and toolkit files.

=item B<-e>, B<--theme> I<GTK2-THEME>

Specifies the GTK+ theme name to use.  When unspecified, the GTK2 theme
is automatically determined using desktop and toolkit files.

=item B<-u>, B<--xde-theme>

Specifies that the GTK+ icon theme and theme name to be used are those
of the X Desktop Environment (XDE) rather than the system default theme.
The default is to specify this flag.

=item B<-T>, B<--timeout> I<TIMEOUT>

=item B<--vendor> I<VENDOR>

Specifies the vendor identifier for branding.  The default, when
unspecified, is to used the value of environment variables
B<XDG_VENDOR_ID> and B<XDG_MENU_PREFIX> to determine the vendor name and
prefix.

=item B<-X>, B<--xsessions>

Specifies that available X sessions (window managers) should be provided
as a menu on the login window.  This allows a user to select an
available session before logging in.

=item B<--default> I<DEFAULT>

Specifies the default X session (window manager) name that should be
used when no X session is selected by the user.  This default is fed as
an argument to F<~/.xinitrc>.

=item B<--username> I<USERNAME>

Specifies the default user name for login.

=item B<-g>, B<--guard> I<SECONDS>

Specifies the number of seconds within which user input will abort
screen locking.  The default is 5 seconds.

=item B<--nosetbg>

Specifies that the background image should not be set by the program.
The default behaviour is to set the background in accordance with the
B<-banner> option.

=item B<--transparent>

Specifies that the login panel should be transparent and that the
widgets should be embedded in the background image.  The default is to
paint the login panel.

=item B<-y>, B<--tray>

Specifies that a status icon for the locker should be placed in the
system tray.

=item B<-n>, B<--dry-run>

Specifies that the program should not perform any actions but should
simply print intentions to standard output.  This option is for testing.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Increase, or set to I<LEVEL>, the debugging verbosity.  The default
debugging verbosity level is zero (0), which means to output no
debugging information.  When non-zero, debugging information will be
printed to standard error.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Increase, or set to I<LEVEL>, the output verbosity.  The default output
verbosity level is one (1), which means to output normal information to
standard output.  When set to zero (0), no output will be printed to
standard output. 

=back

=head1 USAGE

The B<--switcher> command option (the default), or the B<--replace>
option, can be used to run the program as a background session switcher.
In this mode the program installs itself as follows:

=over 4

=item  1.

If possible, takes ownership of the B<_XDE_XSWITCH_S>C<%d> manager
selections for each screen on the display.  If one of these manager
selections is already owned, the program exits with a diagnostic unless
B<--replace> was specified as a command option.

=item 2.

Installs itself as a screen saver using the C<MIT-SCREEN-SAVER>
extension on the X server (if present).

=item 3.

Installs itself as a monitoring program on the controlling terminal for
virtual terminal switches (when the X server is running on a local
virtual terminal).

=item 4.

Listens for a C<Lock> signal from the L<systemd(8)> L<logind(8)>
D-BUS service.

=item 5.

Installs itself in the system tray when the B<--tray> option is
specified.

=item 6.

Monitors for changes.

=back



# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
