=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-dockmgr - a dock manager for XDE

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-dockmgr> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-dockmgr> is a C<C> language application program that manages
dock applications.  It provides startup, ordering and X11 session
management for dock applications.

=head1 OPTIONS

The program uses L<getopt_long_only(3)> to parse options, so abbreviated
or single-dash long options are recognized when not ambiguous.  The
program accepts the following options:

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

Command options affect the major operating mode of the program.  Only
one command option may be specified (with the exception that B<--help>
can be specified in conjunction with any other command option).  When no
command option is specified, B<--manage> is assumed.  The command
options recognized by the program are as follows:

=over

=item [B<--manage>, B<-m>]

Assume normal operation.  Launch dock applications and monitor the dock.

=item B<--replace>, B<-r>

Replace a currently running instance of the program with the current
process.

=item B<--quit>, B<-q>

Ask a running instance to exit.

=item B<--edit>, B<-e>

As a running instance to launch the editor.  The editor is used to
edit the dock applications that will be launched at startup and the
order of dock applications in the dock.

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Print usage information to standard error containing current option
settings and exit.

=item B<--version>, B<-V>

Print the program version to standard output and exit.

=item B<--copying>, B<-C>

Print copying permissions to standard output and exit.

=item B<--client-id> I<CLIENTID>

Tells the program to restore X Session Management settings saved using
the client identifier, I<CLIENTID>.  This is an internal option used for
communicating with an X Session Manager and should not be specified on
the command line.  See L</USAGE>, below.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following general options can be used with most of the command
options listed above:

=over

=item B<--display>, B<-d> I<DISPLAY>

Specifies the display to use.  This is not normally necessary as the
display is obtained from the B<DISPLAY> environment variable when this
option is not specified.

=item B<--nolaunch>, B<-n>

Do not launch any dock applications, but simply monitor and provide X11
session management.

=item B<-n>, B<--dry-run>

Don't do anything, just print what would be done on standard error.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Increase, or set to I<LEVEL>, the debugging verbosity.  The default
debugging verbosity level is zero (0), which means to output no
debugging information.  When non-zero, debugging information will be
printed to standard error.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Increase, or set to I<LEVEL>, the output verbosity.  The default output
verbosity level is one (1), which means to output normal information to
standard output.  When set to zero (0), no output will be printed to
standard output. 

=back

=head1 USAGE

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

The following environment variables are examined by B<xde-traymgr>:

=over

=item B<HOME>

Will be used to determine the user's home directory for the purpose of
calculating the default values for B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME> and
B<XDG_DATA_HOME> when required.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

When set, F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/autostart> will be examined for
F<*.desktop> files.  The variable defaults to F<$HOME/.config>.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

When set, F<$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/autostart> will be examined for each
directory in the colon separated list of directories contained in
B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>.  The variable defaults to F</etc/xdg>.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

When set, F<$XDG_DATA_HOME/dockapps> and F<$XDG_DATA_HOME/applications>
will be examined for C<TrayIcon> category F<*.desktop> files.  The
variable defaults to F<$HOME/.local/share>.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

When set, F<$XDG_DATA_DIRS/dockapps> and F<$XDG_DATA_DIRS/applications>
will be examined for each directory in the colon separated list of
directories contained in B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>.  The variable defaults to
F</usr/local/share:/usr/share>.

=item B<DISPLAY>

=item B<DESKTOP_STARTUP_ID>

=item B<LANG>

=item B<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP>

=item B<XDG_MENU_PREFIX>

=item B<XDG_VENDOR_ID>

=item B<DESKTOP_SESSION>

=back

=head1 BUGS

B<xde-dockmgr> had no known bugs at the time of release.  Please report
bugs for current versions to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xde-session/issues>.

=head1 HISTORY

Originally, XDE used to launch tray icons at startup using F<autostart>
directory F<.desktop> files.  This approach did not provide for session
management control and provided only a crude mechanism for editing tray
icons (basically just editing F<autostart> entries).  I wrote this
application to provide both the ability to place system tray icons under
session management control as well as providing a better mechanism for
editing which system tray icons will be launched at startup with
corresponding window managers.

Many system trays do not have the ability to specify ordering of system
tray icons.  The F<autostart> approach also had the problem that system
tray icons were launched in application id order and raced for position
in the system tray.  This application has the ability to order and
reorder icons in the system tray, as well as controlling the order of
startup.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@cpan.org>

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
