=head1 NAME

xde-logout - Log out of an X Session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-logout> [I<OPTIONS>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-logout> logs the user out of the current XDG compliant session.
The program detects when running under L<lxsession(1)> or L<fbsession(1)>
and performs the appropriate actions.

By default, B<xde-logout> presents a menu that includes:

=over

=item I<Logout>

Logging out of the current X Session.

=item I<SwitchUser>

Switch the logged in user.

=item I<SwitchDesk>

Switch the current desktop environment (X Session manager and window
manager) to another.  A list of sessions is presented.

=back

Power-related options are only presented when the user has the privilege
necessary to perform the actions.  Also, when the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable indicates that the X Session is a remote session, these options
are not activated.  The option is also only present if the hardware is
capable of performing the action.

B<xde-logout> uses I<systemd> on the I<D-Bus> to determine whether the
user and computer are capable of performing these actions.  It also
checks whether some of these actions are inhibited and provides the
inhibiting message when inhibited.

In contrast, B<lxsession-logout(1)> attempts to use console-kit.

=over

=item I<PowerOff>

Power off the computer.

=item I<Reboot>

Reboot the computer.

=item I<Suspend>

Suspend the computer.

=item I<Hibernate>

Hibernate the computer.

=item I<HybridSleep>

Perform a hybrid sleep on the computer.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

B<xde-logout> options are compatible with L<lxsession-logout(1)>
options.
The following options are recognized:

=over

=item B<--help>, B<-h>

Print brief usage information to standard error with the known defaults
of all values and then exit.

=item B<--verbose>, B<-v>

Print debugging information to standard error during operation.

=item B<--prompt>, B<-p> I<PROMPT>

Specifies a custom prompt message.  The prompt message is displayed
above the buttons that specify the action to take.
This option is compatible with L<lxsession-logout(1)>.

=item B<--banner>, B<-b> I<BANNER>

Specifies a custom logout logo.  When unspecified,
L<lxsession-logout(1)> will use the (ugliest ever) LXDE logo.  Is it a
claw?  Is it a sparrow?
When unspecified, B<xde-logout> will use a branded logo that depends on
environment variables.
This option is compatible with L<lxsession-logout(1)>.

L<lxde-logout(1)> sets this option to
F</usr/share/lxde/images/logout-banner.png> which is a 352x125 PNG
image.

=item B<--side>, B<-s> {B<left>|B<top>|B<right>|B<bottom>}

Specifies the side of the window on which the logo will be placed.

L<lxde-logout(1)> sets this option to B<top>.

=back

=head1 X RESOURCES

B<xde-logout> examines and interprets the following X Resources:

=over

=item B<_BLACKBOX_PID>

When B<_BLACKBOX_PID> is set on the root window of the display, it
represents the PID of the Fluxbox window manager running on the display.
(I know, Blackbox doesn't even set this value.)  This is not necessarily
the PID of the machine on which B<xde-logout> is running, if
B<xde-logout> is run from a client on a different host.

=item B<_OPENBOX_PID>

When B<_OPENBOX_PID> is set on the root window of the display, it
represents the PID of the Openbox window manager running on the display.
Additional resources set by the Openbox window manager include
B<_OB_CONFIG_FILE> and B<_OB_VERSION>.

=item B<_NET_SUPPORTING_WM_CHECK>

This resource is set on the root window of the display by all window
managers except TWM.  This is set to the window used for communications
with the window manager.  That window will typically have
B<_NET_WM_NAME> set to the name of the window manager (except for
WindowMaker).  IceWM also sets the B<_NET_WM_PID> of that window to the
PID of the IceWM window manager running on the display.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

B<xde-logout> examines the following environment variables:

=over

=item B<DISPLAY>

Set, of course, to the X display.
B<xde-logout> uses this value to determine whether the X Display is on
the local machine or is remote.  When the B<DISPLAY> begins with a
colon, C<:>, the display is local to the machine on which B<xde-logout>
is running.  Otherwise, it is remote.

When the B<DISPLAY> begins with a colon, C<:>, the X Display may still
be tunnelled through a SSH tunnel; however, there is no B<XDG_VTNR> in
that case and the I<systemd> login service knows the difference.

=item B<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP>, B<FBXDG_DE>, B<DESKTOP_SESSION>

Specifies the current XDG Desktop Environment.  Typically, this is set
by the X Session manager, L<fbsession(1)>, L<lxsession(1)> or others to
the desktop manager in use.  Typical values are C<FLUXBOX>, C<LXDE>,
C<BLACKBOX>, etc.  When unspecified, it is considered an error.

B<FBXDG_DE> is set by L<fbautostart(1)> and L<fbsession(1)> to indicate
the fluxbox desktop environment.  It may be used when
B<XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP> is unset.

=item B<XDG_SEAT>

Set by the XDM or X Server to the seat used by the display.  A typical
values is C<seat0>.

=item B<XDG_VTNR>

Set by the XDM or X Server to the virtual terminal number used by the
display.  A typical value for XDM is C<7>.

=item B<XDG_SESSION_ID>

Set by the XDM or X Server to indicate the active session within the
seat as specified by B<XDG_SEAT>.  A typical value is C<1>.

=item B<XDG_RUNTIME_DIR>

Set by the XDM or X Server to indicate the runtime directory.  A typical
value is F</run/user/1000>.

=item B<XDG_SESSION_PID>, B<_LXSESSION_PID>

Set by L<fbsession(1)> to its main PID.
B<_LXSESSION_PID> is set to the main session PID by L<lxsession(1)> and
is also set by L<fbsession(1)>.

=item B<XDG_VENDOR_ID>

This value is only set by L<fbsession(1)>.  It is set to the
vendor-specific ID that is also typically used (with a dash, C<->,
appended) as the B<XDG_MENU_PREFIX>.  B<xde-logout> uses this
information to determine default branding (splash logos).  When
unspecified, B<xde-logout> will try to derive this value from
B<XDG_MENU_PREFIX> if it is set.

=item B<XDG_MENU_PREFIX>

Specifies the prefix for the XDG applications menu that is sought in
F<@XDG_DATA_DIRS/menus/${XDG_MENU_PREFIX}applications.menu>.

=item B<DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS>

=item B<DBUS_SESSION_BUS_PID>

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>

Specifies the user configuration directory.  When unspecified, it
defaults to F<$HOME/.config> in accordance with XDG specifications.

=item B<XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>

Specifies the system configuration directories.  When unspecified, it
defaults to F</etc/xdg> in accordance with XDG specifications.

=item B<XDG_DATA_HOME>

Specifies the user data directory.  When unspecified, it defaults to
F<$HOME/.local/share> in accordance with XDG specifications.

=item B<XDG_DATA_DIRS>

Specifies the system data directories.  When unspecified, it defaults to
F</usr/local/share:/usr/share> in accordance with XDG specifications.

=item B<XDG_DESKTOP_DIR>

Specifies the user Desktop directory.  When unspecified, it defaults to
F<$HOME/Desktop> in accordance with XDG specifications.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

One of my purposes in writing B<xde-logout> was to avoid some of the
idiosynchrasies of L<lxsession-logout(1)> and L<lxde-logout(1)>.  There
are several problems with those programs as follows:

=over

=item 1.

They use ugly LXDE branding and have only minor support for custom
branding.

=item 2.

They have a very crude layout.

=item 3.

They attempt to use consolekit to determine the privilege for power
functions.  Consolekit is obsolete on I<Arch Linux> and the preferred
mechanism is the I<systemd> login D-Bus service instead.

=item 4.

They cannot switch window managers nor users without the bloated GDM.

=back

B<xde-logout> was originally written using gtk-perl.  This is the
C<C>-language port of the program.  Only the C<C>-language program is
under current development.

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock <bidulock@openss7.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2014 by OpenSS7 Corporation.
All rights reserved.

This program is free software; you basically stole it, and you can,
therefore, do what you want with it, but we take no responsibility in
that.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<fbsession(1)>, L<lxsession(1)>, L<lxsession-logout(1)>,
L<lxde-logout(1)>.

=cut

# vim: set tw=72 nocin:
