=pod

=head1 NAME

xde-wait - wait for desktop resource

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<xde-wait> [I<OPTIONS>] [[-c|--command|--] I<COMMAND> [I<ARGUMENT> [...]]]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<xde-wait> is a simple C<C> language program that can be used to wait
for a window manager, system tray, pager or composite manager before
running a command or exiting.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over

=item [B<-c>, B<--command>, B<-->] I<COMMAND> [I<ARGUMENT> [...]]

When specified, this sequence must be the last portion of the command
line.  I<COMMAND> is the command to execute and I<ARGUMENT>s are the
arguments for I<COMMAND>.  B<xde-wait> will L<execvp(3)> the command and
arguments.

When no command is specified, B<xde-wait> will simply exit after the
necessary resources have arrived.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The options that are detailed below are recognized by B<xdg-wait>.
B<xdg-wait> uses L<getopt_long_only(3)>, so unambiguous abbreviations
of long options and long options with a single dash are also supported.

=head2 COMMAND OPTIONS

The default is to wait for a desktop resource before exiting.  When any
of the following options are specified, the command mode changes:

=over

=item [B<-w>, B<--wait>]

When specified, or no other command option is specified, wait for the
desktop resources and then exit or process the command.

=item B<-i>, B<--info>

Do not actually execute the command or wait; just print what would have
been done to standard output.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Prints usage information to standard output and exits.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Prints detailed version information and exits.

=item B<-C>, B<--copying>

Prints detailed copying permissions and exits.

=back

=head2 GENERAL OPTIONS

The following are more general options:

=over

=item B<-d>, B<--display> I<DISPLAY>

Specify the display to use (overriding the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable).  The default is the value of the B<DISPLAY> environment
variable.

=item B<-s>, B<--screen> I<SCREEN>

Only bind to the root window of the specified screen.

=item B<-N>, B<--nowait>

Do not wait for any desktop resource to appear.  The default is to wait
for a window manager to appear: this option waits for nothing but simply
backgrounds the command (or returns immediately if no command has been
specified).

=item B<-W>, B<--manager>, B<--window-manager>

Wait for a window manager to appear.  This is the default.  See
L<WINDOW MANAGERS> for the detection algorithm.

=item B<-S>, B<--tray>, B<--system-tray>

Wait for a system tray to appear before running the command or exiting.

=item B<-P>, B<--pager>, B<--desktop-pager>

Wait for a desktop pager to appear (or for EWMH/NetWM pager settings to
be set) before running the command or exiting.

=item B<-O>, B<--composite>, B<--composite-manager>

Wait for a compositing manager to appear before running the command or
exiting.

=item B<-U>, B<--audio>, B<--audio-server>

Wait for an X11 audio server to appear (or for root window properties to
be set) before running the command and exiting.  The only audio server
currently detected is pulse audio.

=item B<-A>, B<--all>

Wait for all desktop resources (audio server, window manager, system
tray, desktop pager and composite manager) before running the command or
exiting.

=item B<-t>, B<--delay> I<MILLISECONDS>

The default is to wait indefinitely for a resource to appear before
continuing.  This option will wait not less than I<MILLISECONDS>
milliseconds before proceeding.

=back

=head2 CONFIGURATION OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose> [I<LEVEL>]

Print diagnostic information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the verbosity of output.  The default
level is 1.

=item B<-D>, B<--debug> [I<LEVEL>]

Prints debugging information to standard error during operation.  This
option can be repeated to increase the debugging level.  The default
level is 0.

=back

=head1 USAGE

Normally waiting for a specific resource to appear before launching an
application is performed internal to L<xdg-launch(1)>, or by
applications such as L<xde-autostart(1)>, within the XDG desktop
specifications.  However, some applications do not have desktop entries
and still may need to await resources in specific startup scripts.  For
this purpose, B<xde-wait> will await the necessary resources before
continuing.

For example, the common procedure when starting light-weight window
managers is to start a start a window manager and sleep for two seconds
before starting applications like so:

    start-fluxbox & wm=$!
    sleep 2
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmblob
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmfire
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmcalclock
    xtoolwait pnmixer
    wait $wm

This is not optimal and increases the amount of time that it takes for a
full desktop environment to start.

With B<xde-wait>, you would use the following:

    start-fluxbox & wm=$!
    xde-wait --manager
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmblob
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmfire
    xtoolwait -withdrawn wmcalclock
    xde-wait --system-tray
    xtoolwait pnmixer
    wait $wm

This starts applications immediately after the window manager becomes
available.

=head1 BUGS

B<xde-wait> had no know bugs at the time of release.  Please report
bugs in current versions to the source code repository at
L<https://github.com/bbidulock/xde-session/issues/>.

=head1 HISTORY

I wrote B<xde-wait> (and the comparable features of L<xdg-launch(1)>) to
support light-weight applications that behave poorly when launched
before a window manager, system tray or pager are available.  Many
light-weight system tray icons are particularly brittle when launched
before a system tray.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<xtoolwait(1x)>,
L<xdg-launch(1)>,
L<xdg-toolwait(1)>

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Bidulock L<mailto:bidulock@openss7.org>.

See B<--copying> for full copyright notice and copying permissions.

=head1 LICENSE

See the F<COPYING> file in the distribution or use the B<--copying> flag
to display copying permissions.

=cut

# vim: set sw=4 tw=72 nocin spell spelllang=en_ca:
